From the land of Georgia, an independent nation that was once a republic of the Soviet Union, a new light shines for Orthodox Christians around the world. Georgia, the first nation to adopt Christianity as the national religion in the 4th century, has produced a host of holy women and men and the most recent, St. Gabriel Urgebadze. St. Gabriel has become one of the most popular Orthodox saints in Georgia and icons and photographs of him are found everywhere: in churches, schools, cars, public transportation. He has become known throughout the Orthodox world and is honored with the titles “Confessor of the Faith”: one who suffered for Christ and also with the unusual title “Fool for Christ”.

St. Gabriel was born in 1929 with the name Goderdzi Urgebadze to a father who was an official in the Communist party but was murdered in 1931. Goderzi came to faith in Christ on his own while still a young child. One day he overheard neighbors fighting and one shouted “You have crucified me like Christ”. Goderdzi did not know what “crucified” meant or who Christ was. The neighbors were afraid to answer his questions so they sent him to the local church. The local church had been closed by the Communists but a guard who worked there showed him an icon of the Crucifixion and told him to read the life of Christ. Saving his money, he bought a copy of the New Testament which he read day and night as he learned for the first time about this Jesus who was crucified because of His love for him. His new-found faith and constant prayer and Bible reading worried his mother. She repeatedly scolded him and wished he were like “normal” children his age. She threw his Bible into the garbage shouting “It’s ruined your life”. Goderzi retrieved his beloved book from the trash and knew he had no choice but to leave home. He walked for a day and a night until he reached a monastery where he was taken under the care of two holy monks: St. John Maisuradze and St. George-John Mkheidze. After three months of searching for her son, his mother promised that she would not interfere with his spiritual life if he returned home. He remained obedient to her, but continued his daily prayer and study of the Gospels, also helping his stepfather in his bread shop.

In 1949 Goderdzi was called up to complete his compulsory military service but even surrounded by militant atheists he never abandoned his faith. He visited churches near his deployment whenever he could sneak away. His religious faith was eventually discovered and upon discharge from the army was labeled as mentally ill because only such people believed in God, angels and demons. Returning home after his military duty he began building a small chapel in the yard of his home. He would scour the local landfills to search for icons for his chapel which people had discarded under the influence of the atheistic Communists. While he desired to enter a monastery, the Communist authorities made it extremely difficult for any young man to pursue a religious vocation.

Finally in 1954, upon the recommendation of the Patriarch of Georgia-Melchizedek, Goderzi entered the monastery in Motsameta and was tonsured as a monk with the name Gabriel in honor of St. Gabriel of Athos. After a period of probation he was ordained deacon and then priest.
